= Contents =
  - [[#working with strings|working with strings]]
    - [[#working with strings#iterate over strings|iterate over strings]]
    - [[#working with strings#matching patterns|matching patterns]]
      - [[#working with strings#matching patterns#page 104 (wow addons)|page 104 (wow addons)]]

= working with strings =



== iterate over strings ==

{{{lua -- using string.byte might be faster for bigger sets

for c in string.gmatch("sentence", ".") do print(c) end }}}

* string.gmatch - is best when you are only interested in the matches.

* string.gsub - is best when you need to substitute the matches without regard
  to their position.

* string.match - is the most versatile, returning the first match and its
  position. The cost is not being specialized for any task, thus needing more
  code.

== string formatting ==

* %c—Takes a number argument and formats it as the ASCII character that
  corresponds to the number.

* %d, %i—Takesanumberargumentandformatsitasasignedinteger.

* %o—Takes a number argument and formats it as an octal number.

* %u—Takes a number argument and formats it as an unsigned integer.

* %x—Takes a number argument and formats it as a hexadecimal number, using
  lowercase letters.

* %X—Takes a number argument and formats it as a hexadecimal number, using
  capital letters.

* %e—Takes a number argument and formats it as scientific notation, with a
  lowercase e.

* %E—Takes a number argument and formats it as scientific notation, with an
  uppercase E.

* %f—Takes a number argument and formats it as a floating-point number. %g and
  %G—Takes a number and formats it according to either %e (or %E if %G is
  specified) or %f, depending on which is shortest.

* %q—Formats a string so it can safely be read back into a Lua interpreter.

* %s—Takes a string and formats it according to the supplied options.

* %a - any word character

* %% - literal % string

* %c - control character '\n'

* %b() - match between balanced parenthesis {{{lua

string.format(“%%c: %c“, 83)            %c: S string.format(“%+d“, 17.0)
+17 string.format(“%05d“, 17)               00017 string.format(“%o“, 17)
21 string.format(“%u“, 3.14)               3 string.format(“%x“, 13)
D string.format(“%X“, 13)                 D string.format(“%e“, 1000)
1.000000e+03 string.format(“%E“, 1000)               1.000000E+03
string.format(“%6.3f“, 13)              13.000 string.format(“%q“, [[“One“,
“Two“]])   “\“One\“, \“Two\““ string.format(“%s“, “monkey“)           monkey
string.format(“%10s“, “monkey“)         monkey mon string.format(“%5.3s“,
“monkey“)

}}}

== matching patterns ==

=== page 104 (wow addons) ===

Match a non-space token in a string. "%S+"

Match a string beginning with the text MYADDON: followed by at least one
character, capturing the rest of the string. "MYADDON: ( .+)"


{{{lua
t = {}
s = "from=world, to=lua"
for k, v in string.gmatch(s, "(%w+)=(%w+)") do
  t[k] = v
end

for k, v in pairs(t) do
  print(k, v)
end
}}}


== string.gsub(s, pattern, repl [, n]) ==

* repl can be a look up table, k,v pairs, or a function
* lookups cannot return true/false
* this needs further research on page 104
